It is now time to automate science.  This chapter introduces only one new feature, then you can get to the building.

The new feature is very simple, often referred to as larger cursors. Shift i zooms out, increasing the size of your cursor, and control i makes it smaller.

When your cursor is zoomed out, you get a summary of what is in the area, and your cursor moves by the larger size.  For example, at size 3, each move is by 3 tiles, and you are getting a summary of the 3x3 area centered at your cursor's position.

This is important for a bunch of reasons, but for this chapter the point of it is to find somewhere to build.

Control shift i toggles combat mode.  If you turn combat mode on, the cursor will stop working and a bunch of controls change meaning.  If you press it by accident, press it again to get out.

Anyway, let's get to it.  Start by finding some empty space to build. Rocks and trees are fine, but cliffs and resource patches are not.  You can't build over cliffs, and if you build over resource patches you have to take it down later to put drills there instead.

The recipe for automation science packs is one copper plate and one iron gear wheel, and the recipe for an iron gear wheel is 2 iron plates.

That means an automation science pack needs 2 iron plates and 1 copper plate.  To craft 100, you need  200 iron plates and 100 copper plates, etc.

You can now craft an assembling machine 1, as long as you have completed the automation research.  Please make 2 of these, 2 inserters, and 2 electric poles.  Remember, 2 electric poles is only one craft.

Assembling machines are crafting machines, along with many other buildings in Factorio.  Earlier, we showed you that the crafting menu lets you get information on what can craft an item by pressing k.

Assembling machines can craft anything which the crafting menu says they can craft.

Slightly later on, you will unlock recipes which cannot be crafted by hand, and must be made in a machine, just like how smelting must happen in a furnace.  You will also unlock recipes which require better or sometimes even specific machines.

The other difference between machines is how fast they craft.  An assembling machine 1 crafts half as fast as you.  You can see this after placement by right clicking the machine on the map.

You now need to get power poles to the empty area you chose.  Since you are now working with more than one, it's worth knowing that pressing n tells you which other poles are connected to it.  As a reminder, build lock places poles at the maximum distance, and they automatically connect to all other poles in range when placed.

Just like inserters can move things to and from belts, they can move things between machines.  Players call this kind of design direct insertion.  We will work west to east.

Note that as usual, a blueprint for a working copy of this setup is attached.

First, place an assembling machine.  It is 3 by 3.  Then, count 4 tiles right and place a second.

This is a perfect row, but there is a 1 tile gap between them.  In that gap, you can place an inserter and a power pole.

The pole powers both machines and the inserter.

Next, we do the same thing: move 4 tiles to the right of the northwest corner of the second machine.  Then, we place our lab, also 3 by 3.

And just like we did before, an inserter and small pole goes into the gap.

Next, you need to get a line of poles to within 7 tiles of one of the poles in this setup.  That will connect it to your electrical network.

Finally, it is time to turn it on.

Clicking an assembling machine which is not configured opens directly to the recipe selector, which works exactly like your crafting menu.  This includes searching, which works in all mod UIs.  Click the first machine and set it to iron gear wheel, then click the second and set it to automation science pack.

Next up, you can smart insert into them with control click.  Smart insert a bunch of iron plates into the iron gear wheel assembler, and then smart insert a bunch of copper plates into the automation science pack assembler.

After they are configured, they have inventories.  If you click again, you can see their inventories as the first tab, and change the recipe by hitting control tab to get to the building configuration.

Note that this can take a few hundred ms, so if you go super fast you might not see the inventories yet.

The first inventory is the inputs, and the mod will tell you what it can accept.  Once configured, assembling machines only take the items they need for the current recipe.

Now, select some technologies and research them.  This setup will produce an automation science pack once every 10 seconds (the recipe is 5 seconds, but the machine is 2 times slower), so technologies will take at minimum 10 seconds times their science pack requirement.

The iron gear wheel machine often says output full.  This is expected.  It happens because the iron gear wheel recipe takes only 0.5 seconds (1 second in the machine, since it is 2 times slower than you are).  That means that this one gear assembler can satisfy up to 10 automation assemblers.

It's not worth making use of that now.  Early game, technology is cheap enough that you might as well wait until you have the basics unlocked.

To continue on, you should spend some time playing around.  At this point, you can unlock everything that only needs automation science packs, though slowly.

The two most important technologies, and the ones you need for this tutorial, are logistics and electric mining drill.  You should do both of those as soon as possible, then come back for the next chapter.

While you are waiting, you have a few options.

First, you can set up more drills and furnaces on ore patches.  That will get you more plates.  This setup will consume plates extremely quickly, and you probably didn't have enough.  Remember that copy/paste exists.  You can copy a single furnace-drill setup a bunch of times, then copy the larger square, and so on.

Second, you could build more copies of this lab-assembler setup, and use them to complete research faster.  That assumes that you have enough plates.

Third, if you right click an electric pole you will see that the pole says you are almost using all the electricity you can produce.  If you place a second boiler next to your first facing the same direction, it will receive water from the first one. In this way, you can scale power.

We have also attached a blueprint for power to this chapter.  It consists of 2 boilers, 4 steam engines, and 2 electric poles.

If you take it and feed it water on either side, both boilers get water (because boilers pass water through to each other) and all 4 steam engines are covered by a pole.

A slight modification to this blueprint can make it tileable.  If your synthesizer is butchering that, it's tile-able.  A tileable blueprint is one where you can put copies next to each other and they will all connect without you doing anything.

You have sort of seen this before.  The transport belt copy/paste pattern and the drill+furnace combination are all tileable, though they don't really interact with each other.

At this point in the game you really only need 2 steam engines, but being slightly less efficient lets us hand you an optimal setup for later.

Now that you are scaling, it is worth mentioning that one offshore pump can satisfy 200 boilers, and each boiler can satisfy 2 steam engines.  Because steam engines can connect to each other, this often ends up looking like a tower made of a boiler and two steam engines, repeated a bunch of times.

The problem is, though, that every steam engine needs to be in the supply range of a pole to contribute.  Since they are 3 wide poles can connect to each other over two of them, but a pole on one side of a steam engine can't reach far enough to cover one adjacent to it.

For that reason, you have to leave some gaps every so often to get poles in the right place.

Look at the blueprint and this will probably make a lot more sense.  But on the flip side this is a tutorial, not a walkthrough, and discovering these setups for yourself is a large part of the game.  So we won't spend more time explaining it.
