If you have followed the tutorial so far, you should have the following recipes unlocked: electric mining drill, long-handed inserter, splitter, and underground belt.  This chapter will talk about the first two, and the next chapter will revisit belts.

At this point, you know all core mod features.  The rest of these tutorials are about teaching you trickier game concepts and parts of the mod for specific situations.

To introduce the long-handed inserter and electric mining drill, we are now going to talk about scaling and automating smelting.

An electric mining drill is like a burner mining drill, but running off electricity.

It has two other important differences. First, it is 3 by 3 instead of 2 by 2, and second it mines in a 5 by 5 area.  If you place it, it mines everything underneath, plus one tile out on each side.

If you put two drills immediately next to each other with no gap, they will share some tiles.  This is fine, and does not penalize the drills at all.  The fastest way to mine a resource patch is to cover it with as many drills as possible in this way.

But since electric mining drills have a larger mining area, they can mine underneath placed belts and poles too.

Just like the burner mining drill, the electric mining drill places items directly to the ground.  But in this case they come out the center of the north side, rather than a corner.

You can also have it feed to a furnace or chest directly.

The burner mining drill is slower, smaller, and needs coal to function.  So to scale smelting with it, you would have to get coal over to your iron and copper patches, then feed the drill.

To move forward, pick an area to build your smelters in.  This will consist of furnaces, some belts, and some inserters.  10 to 20 tiles wide in one direction and 20+ in the other direction will be good enough to start.  If you are keeping everything facing north, then you're looking for a tall skinny rectangle.

Place your drill, get poles to it, then run a long belt to the area you chose for smelting.

Next, place another drill on your coal, and get a belt from it to your smelting area as well.

Now is a good moment to mention the warnings menu.  If you press p, you get a menu of warnings.  These aren't very useful in the long run, but the one thing they are very helpful with is figuring out what doesn't have power yet.

Now we will turn our attention to the long-handed inserter.  The long-handed inserter works just like the inserter, but it picks up from exactly 2 tiles in front of it and drops to exactly 2 tiles behind it.

It is also slightly faster than a normal inserter.

To emphasize the power of the long-handed inserter, it doesn't matter what's in the way.  It can move things over other inserters, belts, chests, etc.  It never stops early.

This means that the total number of inserters you can have on one side of a 3 by 3 machine like your assembling machines is 6, not 3!  If you place two rows of long-handed inserters, they will pass items over each other.

There are a number of interesting advanced tricks here that you can discover by combining belts and long-handed inserters in various ways.

But for now, what we care about is that an inserter and a long-handed inserter on the same side of a machine let us pass two belts of different things alongside it.

If you have one belt holding coal and one belt holding iron ore, then pairing these lets you get both into the furnace.

Before we go much further, two warnings.

First, electric mining drills use lots of power.  You need to keep an eye on that.

Second, if you use electric mining drills to get coal and your power stops working, then you will have no power until you fuel it by hand.  Worse, if you are running at capacity, there may not be enough power to get the drills running reliably enough for the factory to start up again.  This is worth explaining further.

If you try to use electric mining drills for coal, it falls apart like this.  Your factory uses all of the power.  Then the drills slow down.  The coal to your generators decreases, and now your generators are producing less power.

As this happens, all belts are emptying as machines use up ingredients but don't get more.

When you try to fix it, all the drills and assembling machines and inserters turn on trying to refill all the now-empty belts as fast as possible.

That will then consume more power than usual, which raises the demand for coal to your generators.

If you are sufficiently unlucky, your setup cannot meet this power requirement, and will run out of coal almost immediately.  Then, you repeat the cycle.

For these reasons, burner mining drills still have their place, even if you will only ever use a few.  At minimum, they serve as a valuable backup method to make sure you always have coal coming for your steam engines, though many players just choose to always mine their coal with them and not worry about it at all.

Much, much later you may need more coal than you can get from burner mining drills, but you can worry about it then.  At that point in the game, you are probably expanding far enough to have a second coal patch, so you can just reserve one for power.

You can stop reading here if you want to discover the game for yourself.  The rest of this chapter discusses the practical implications of these mechanics, and is a whole bunch of spoilers without new mod features.

An example blueprint is attached to this chapter, consisting of a 7-wide by 3-high tileable smelter.  It consists of two input belts going north on the left side and an output belt going south on the right.

One of the input belts should get coal, and the other should get ore.  It does not matter which is which this time.

Once you have done that and run poles to the blueprint, the furnace will smelt until the output belt fills up.

The reason this blueprint is tileable is that placing copies of it going north hooks them up to the last copy, by extending both the input and output belts.

The output belt goes south so that it comes out by the input.  This arrangement lets you grow it forever without having to move the output locations.

In practice, if you do the math, a single basic belt can only support 48 stone furnaces, and later you will upgrade these to steel furnaces which are twice as fast, so going beyond 24 furnaces per belt is a waste.  Right now though, you can barely support one or two.

A healthy factory has two properties.  First, the basic machines produce at least as much as you are consuming.  Second, the science pack machines are always busy.

There are a lot of other considerations, for example whether you are producing more science than you can use.  It is easy to build more than you can use without noticing, so be careful of that.

You will observe two things when it is time to consider adding more smelting capacity.  First, pressing u while holding plates or in the crafting menu will say that there are as many being produced as are consumed.  Second, lots of machines will be stuck sitting around without ingredients.

What you have to do in this case is work backward until you find the first stopped piece.  In the early game while your factory never has branches, this will be after the last piece that is still running, and is often called the bottleneck.

To do it you can also use production info with u.  Counterintuitively, the last functioning part of your factory is probably running at full speed.

When you work back, sometimes you will arrive at the smelter.  And when you do, you can stack more copies of the blueprint from this chapter.

Sometimes, though, you will go back one step further and end up needing more drills. We talk about that next.
