Congratulations on reaching the end of the tutorial.  You now know enough to play and hopefully to win the game.  This chapter is a grab bag of important explanations that do not fit nicely elsewhere but which you are unlikely to discover on your own, each only a couple paragraphs.  The tutorials after this one either provide spoilers or discuss late-game mechanics.

As a reminder, we have reference documentation on our GitHub, with full key lists and reference-style documentation.

The first and most crucial thing is the accessibility radar.  We promised we would explain it, and then we didn't.  This is because it has been doing what it is supposed to this whole time, as long as you placed it back when we suggested it as a way to test power.

Factorio calls 32 by 32 tile areas chunks.  The map is made of chunks.  As the game needs more map, it generates more chunks.  A chunk may be visible, charted, uncharted, or not generated.

The job of a radar, for sighted and blind players alike, is to keep chunks close to the radar visible and chunks further from the radar but not out of range charted.  As far as you are concerned, the difference is that charted-but-not-visible chunks say blurred.

For the most part we ignore visibility and all of that, and you do not have a fog of war.  But radars matter to you for two reasons.

The first of these is that charting chunks for the first time is how the scanner can become aware of them, and thus how one finds distant resource patches.  A sighted player does this by exploring with the car and using smaller radars, but this is inconvenient for you, so the accessibility radar is a radar which has been rebalanced to make almost no chunks visible.  Instead, it charts a huge range.

The other reason radars matter--and why you care about regular ones--is that we respect chunk visibility for remote entity configuration.  You cannot modify an entity's inventory remotely, but all settings are fair game, if and only if it is in a visible chunk.  Otherwise, you need to walk over to it.

For the most part, though, you can ignore this until you've built something big--just keep an accessibility radar going until it says 100%, then move it somewhere else.

If you want to chart faster, radars work together, so you can just place more.

Next, we need to revisit inserters.  There are 3 things you should know.

First, not all inserters move one item at a time.  We said that using the ground to move items is slower for reasons which would become evident later.  The reason for that is that inserters can grab more than one item at once if more than one item is under their hand.  So for example a full belt gives it the opportunity to grab up to 16 at a time, and a chest much more than that.  They can also drop more than one at a time if there is space.

You get access to this in two ways, either by researching inserter stack size bonuses or using the bulk inserter.

Second, everything but the burner inserter has filters.  Filters are available by clicking the inserter, and can be used to lock the inserter to specific items only.

This is not overly useful, but it is extremely helpful in situations where you have shared chests and similar, so it is good to know about.  There is at least one late game situation in which it is essential, but we won't spoil that for you here.

Third, inserters have a special rule with labs.  Labs function like a chest and a crafting machine at the same time.

If you make a chain of labs with inserters between them, the game will move science packs to the furthest lab and then fill the labs up one after another with just enough to do research.

This means that instead of having to figure out how to get science packs to all labs, you can drop it to one lab, and just use inserters between labs to scale it.  This is useful, being as you eventually need to get at least 6 science packs into all labs.

Next up is the car.  Driving manually is weird, and we don't recommend it unless you are doing combat.  But Kruise Kontrol can drive for you.

You will want to make sure to keep the car in a reasonably open area, otherwise it will do minor damage to your structures when Kruise Kontrol starts it.

Cars are useful because they function like chests on wheels.  You can put a bunch of items in them, then drive the car to your target location.

The mod helps you out with this by offering a keystroke, shift v, to cycle between all vehicles near your character.

The final thing to discuss is landfill and tile placement.  We can't really give you a tutorial on this because it is not possible to contrive a good situation.

Some items place tiles instead of entities, for example stone brick places brick paths.  For the most part, these are decorative and simply provide a faster walking speed.

The one special exception to this though is landfill, which is an expensive way to fill in lakes.

The mod makes building and mining tiles pretty easy.  To build them, hold the item in hand and click.  To build more at once, enlarge your cursor.

In the same way, you can mine tiles.  But there are two important things about mining tiles.

First, you need to be holding the tile to mine in hand to open the tile interface.

Second, there is a bug.  If you hold x, you will mine a little bit extra.  Why this happens is complicated, but mining tiles is a very rare operation so for now we don't consider it worth fixing.

To work around it, just briefly tap x instead.

There are also some special interactions with planners--these aren't implemented by us.

First, a blueprint by default only includes tiles if you did not select any entities.  To always include tiles, right click instead and check the box.

Second, a deconstruction planner by default only deconstructs tiles if you select no entities.  This is so that your first mark can take things on top of tiles without picking up the floor.

This, too, can be changed in planner config.

Remember, though: changing planner config makes the planner permanent, so you will need to explicitly delete it or keep it around.

In any case, good luck.  From this point, you might need the occasional bit of help to figure things out, but you should know everything you need to know to operate the mod.

The only remaining tutorial chapter that is essential is on logistic and construction robots, which you will unlock many hours from now.  From time to time we may add other non-essential chapters after this one, and when we do so we will make sure to put them in the change log.
