It is now time to talk about rulers, build lock, and the clipboard.  These are your tools for building long lines.

Build lock is the most important.  When build lock is enabled, every movement of your character builds behind your character.

Movements of your cursor also try to build one tile behind your cursor (for example pressing once builds on the current tile then moves), but game API limitations prevent this from working nicely, and it is best avoided.

Walking in general is not advantageous, but there is one exception: walking a line you have already cleared of obstacles.

If you know you want to build 200 transport belts in a line, you can turn build lock on, use the arrow keys to run the line, then fix the ends.  The ends will usually be a few tiles longer than you wanted.

To use build lock, toggle it with control b.  It turns itself off if your hand is emptied, if you hit control b again, or if you run into an obstacle that pushes you in an unexpected direction.

Most of the time build lock is equivalent to just building by hand, as if you had moved the cursor along the line and clicked all the buttons.  But there are two important cases where this is not true because we offer more convenient behaviors instead.

The first one is transport belts.  For transport belts, the belts follow your character and turn as your character does. You run in the direction you want the belt to go, and the belts follow you around.  Generally you don't want to use this to make corners, but you can if precision isn't something you care much about this time.

The other case is electric poles.  For electric poles, we place them at the maximum reach to connect to the last one in the chain.  So for small electric poles the first one is always placed as soon as possible, then every 7 tiles thereafter.

We closed the last chapter by setting up your self-maintaining coal mine, but your steam engine and boiler is probably very far away because it needs to be near water.  Now you have a tool to make the line conveniently.

Work out where the long line needs to be, turn build lock on, and run it. Then change the ends to where they need to be.  If you used the transport belt version of the sustaining coal mine, the input end needs to be at that belt, and then the output end goes within one tile of the boiler so an inserter can reach it.

If you do this right, then you now have a power setup that will run until the drill runs out of coal. That enables you to use inserters and electric mining drills.  We will talk more about electric mining drills in a little bit.

You probably care about precision.  There are two tools to help with this, one from vanilla and one from the mod.

The mod offers audio rulers.  You place the audio ruler with control alt b, and clear it with alt shift b.

When your cursor lines up with the audio ruler, you hear a tone.  The two low tones indicate that you are within one tile of the line, and the high tone indicates perfect alignment.  The actual point itself makes a click instead.

You should take a moment to place an audio ruler and to move around to see what shape it projects.  It specifically forms a cross going to infinity in all directions.

The audio ruler works with cursor skipping. When cursor skipping, your cursor will stop at the audio ruler instead of continuing past it.

It also works with your character.  Your character walking through a ruler also plays the tones.

What it does not do is turn build lock off.  We cannot know if that's why you wanted the ruler, so it is your responsibility not to keep running once you hit it.

As a concrete example, you can place an audio ruler at your boiler, use cursor skipping to see how far it is, then run a belt until it hits the ruler before turning toward the boiler.

Vanilla offers the clipboard, which we interface with.  You have worked with blueprints before.  The clipboard is just like that, but the blueprints it makes delete themselves when you press q.

To use it, you press control c to get the copy tool, then you click two points.  The mod will take everything inside that box and turn it into a blueprint.  Just like the other blueprints you have seen, it can be rotated.

To keep a copy, you can open your inventory and click an empty slot.  Be careful.  Vanilla and the mod both keep blueprints around if you empty your hand by swapping to something else using the inventory controls.

Cut also works the same way, but introduces a new status: marked for deconstruction.  Entities which are marked for deconstruction are deconstructed by automated tools that you unlock later, but they can also be deconstructed by KK and have new blueprints placed over them.

Cut will take the box you mark and mark everything in it for destruction, then give you a blueprint of what was there.

You can use cut to grab a large setup and move it sideways by a few tiles for example, by just placing the blueprint and invoking KK.

Just like a traditional clipboard, you can get whatever is on the clipboard back with control v.

There is an edge case here.  Sighted players build from the center of buildings and blueprints, not from the northwest corner.  For this reason, the mod has to compute the dimensions of the blueprint by what is in it.  This means that if you put one entity in the blueprint and then select a 1000 by 1000 box, you will only get the one entity.  If that's a chest, your blueprint is only 1 by 1!

This can also get tricky because there is not necessarily an entity at every corner.  To make an example, place 4 chests in a square, delete the northwest chest, and then blueprint it.  You will find that your blueprint is still 4 by 4, and that when placed your cursor is over the hole!

These are very important points to remember.  If you ever need to force a blueprint to be a certain size, consider some cheap wooden chests at all 4 corners.

Here is how you use this to build a line.

Place 5 belt segments.  Say facing east.  Hit control c, click the first belt segment, hit shift d to skip to the eastern end, and click again.  You now have a blueprint of 5 belt segments in your hand.

You can now move one tile past the end of the belt, place it, cursor skip over the ghosts, place it, etc. as many times as you want.  Each one extends the belt by 5.

You can blueprint ghosts without building them, so you can use this to make a line of 20 belts, then copy the whole line of 20.  Now you're placing 20 at a time.

It's even easier than this though.  The mod offers another feature, skip by preview.  Instead of hitting shift wasd, hit control wasd.

In this case, you move by the exact width or height of what you are holding, without regard to the ground.  This also respects rotation.

So, instead of pressing a bunch of keys, you could press control d, click, control d, click,  over and over as fast as possible.

When placing blueprints, the distance from your character doesn't matter because you are only placing ghosts.  Once you have built a long line, KK can build it out for you and will handle the running around.

Blueprints deal with trees for you by marking them for deconstruction.  So when KK builds it, KK will clear the area.

Now that you are armed with these tools, you should be able to complete your power setup.

Power does not run unless there is something that needs it.  The one thing you can craft right now which will always use power no matter what is the accessibility radar.  Craft one and use it to test your power setup.  We will explain what it is for later, but placing one as soon as possible and leaving it on is something you want to do.

Right clicking on power poles gives you more information, including satisfaction, an abstract measure of how well you are doing at meeting the electrical demands of your machines.  Now is a good time to figure out how this all looks when it is working correctly.

Soon, you will need to scale your power output, which means connecting more boilers and steam engines up.  If you know what it looks like when it is working correctly, then you will have an easier time recognizing when there is a problem or a need for more power.
